DATA, INFO, MESSAGES

- Computers represent all types of info such as images, text, music, documents as BINARY (1s and 0s).

Data VS Information:
- Data are raw symbols with no meaning like 010011110101.
- Information is data arranged with context and rules to create meaning.


Why binary? because early computer can only swithc between ON (1) and OFF (0).

1 bit = 1 binary digit (1 or 0);
8 bits = 1 byte which can be 256 posible combinations

How many unique values can N bit represent?
    -> 1 bit = 2 values (0, and 1)
    -> 2 bits = 4 values (00, 01, 11, 10)
    -> 3 bits = 8 values (000, 001, 010, 100, 011, 101, 111, 110)
    -> so N bits -> you multiply N times 2 -> values so if bits 3 then values is 2 * 2 * 2 = 8 values
        if bits are 5 then values are 2 * 2 * 2 * 2 * 2 = 32 values

    

ASCII -> Stans for AMERICAN STANDARD CODE for INFORMATION INTERCHANGE
    This allows computers to translates human-readable text into binary storage
    so uppercase "A" is 01000001 whereas lowercase "a" is 01100001

Pixels is for storing images > images are divided into small squares (pixels) and each square has one color:
    there are 8-bit color:
        first 3 bits are red
        second 3 bits are green
        third 2 bits are blue
    total 256 posible colors

    so for example if we have a binary code like 11111100 -> means: max red + max green + no blue = bright yellow

Data Messaging:
    When you send a photo over the internet, the photo is is binary data, the TO/FROM addresses are also added as binary data
    and everythign the photo and the addresses are sent as BINARY STREAMS (of 1s and 0s).
    Now, the computer that receives that message will strip the addressing information and display the photo.


HARDWARE, FIRMWARE, SOFTWARE

Hardware are physical component you can physically touch.
    Components:
    -> CPU is the brain that does all the calculations and sends instructions
    -> Motherboard is like the nervous system that connects all components so they can communicate
    -> RAM is like your desk a temporary place where you can work and store things, so it is a fast and short-term working memory
    -> Hard Drive is like the library which is slow, long-term permanent storage.

    Note: RAM is volatile meaning it needs electricity to hold data. Hard Drive is non-volatile meaning, doesnt data persists without power.

Firmware is software (binary instructions) baked into a hardware chip. It is stored in the BIOS chip, also known as ROM.
    BIO(Basic Input Ouput sytem) - ROM (Read Only Memory)
    Properties:
    -> Non-volatile
    -> it is read-only
    -> static always does the same thing

    When you turn on the computer, press the power button, your RAM is empty and the CPU doesnt have any instructions, 
        then, CPU will look at the BIOs chip (firmware) for instructions, the BIOs chip will indentify all connected
        hardware in your computer like RAM size, hard drives, graphics cards, etc. Then the BIOs will locate the
        OS the operating system(or system sOFTWARE) on the hard drive and copies it into your RAM, and then your OP operating systerm will
        load and then you can use your computer.

Software is binary instructions store on writable long-term storage (hard drive).
    OS (operating system) -> stored in a writable hard drive -> is Windows, macOs, Linux
        This is the first software that is loaded into the RAM after boot(after turning on computer)
        This provides 3 things: UI, hardware control, ability to run apps.
        This is require for a standard computer to function
    
    Apps
        These are loaded into RAM when opened and removed when closed
        These must be built for a specific OS because they rely on that OS's specific instructions

Why dont we store everything in the hard drive and why we need RAM?
    The reason is SPEED


LANGUAGES, SYNTAX, SEMANTICS

- Programming languages are the bridge between human intent and binary machine instructions
- Syntax is the structure of your code, like the grammar, rules. So one missing character/symbol, crashes.
- Semantics are the meaning - what you code does what you indended it to do.
- The different is the wrong syntax - program doesnt run. whereas wrong semantics, programs still runs but incorrectly.

HISTORICAL OVERVIEW OF COMPUTERS
1. Behemoths (40s - 60s)
    built with vaccums in large rooms, input is switches dials and ouput lights
2. Business(60s - 80s)
    medium/large business. Output was teletype monocrome dumb terminals
    input/poutput was keyboards
3. Graphical (80s, 2000s)
    apple introduce GUI + mouse
    input/poutput was mouse/GUI
    GUI (point and click interfaces) 
4. Portable (2000s - today)
    true portability, laptoos, tablets, smartphones, etc.
    note that smartphones is still a computer - has RAM, CPU, and long-term storage (hard-drive)

